---
title: "What is systemd"
description: "I'm going to finally find out"
toc: true
draft: false
date: '2022-11-14'
categories:
- linux
comments:
  giscus:
    repo: stantonius/home
---



From what I understand, systemd is an **init system** found in many Linux distributions. 

What is an init system? Manage which services are running. 

> Note: service = daemon = unit

Simply put, you can add something like a script to `systemd` to tell your Linux system *how* to run the script.

## A Use Case

Let's take an example. With my GCP projects, we need to have a service called a Cloud SQL Proxy running in a VM 24/7 in order for CloudSQL-to-BigQuery datastreaming to pass through a VPS-peering proxy service. In other words, we need a bash script to be running all the time in a VM. The problem is that several minutes after running my script and disconnecting from SSH, the datastream fails because the script is interrupted and nothing is telling our VM to restart it. `systemd` is one of the possible solutions to run a script persistently. 

## `systemctl`

`systemctl` is the main command with which you engage with `systemd`. Some of the commands you might use are:

* `systemctl status <service_name>`
* `sudo systemctl enable <service_name>`: oftentimes, you need to enable a service first before you can start it
* `sudo systemctl start <service_name>`
* A shortcut for `enable` and `start` is `sudo systemctl enable --now <service_name>`
* `sudo systemctl restart <service_name>`: use this when you change the config file for a service
	* Note some services will use `reload` instead of `restart`
*  `sudo systemctl daemon-reload` : when you change a service configuration without it running

Of course, there is also `stop` and `disable` commands 

## Creating a `.service`

In order to actually create a `systemd` service, we need to create a `.service` file. It looks like there are multiple places a `systemd` file can sit, but two of the ones I have seen are: 
 * `/etc/systemd/system/`
 * `/usr/lib/systemd/system/`

Note that in our case, because we are running a script, I ended up using the `/etc/systemd/system/` directory to create the new service.

Below is the file I created for our Cloud SQL Proxy use case called `cloudsqlproxy.service`

```ini
[Unit]
Description=Script to keep CLoud SQL Proxy running persistently
After=network.target

[Service]
Type=simple
ExecStart=/home/<USER_DIR>/cloud_sql_proxy -credential_file=<CREDENTIAL_FILE> -instances=<INSTANCE_NAME>=tcp:0.0.0.0:3306 -ip_address_types=PRIVATE
WorkingDirectory=/home/<USER_DIR>/
Restart=always
RestartSec=5
StartLimitIntervalSec=60
```

You must then `enable` and`start` the service as described above. In order to check everything has worked, run the `systemctl status` command.

### Fixing Errors

If you are anything like me, the first few times you try this you will encounter errors. In order to try again, I found I needed to run these two commands:

*  `sudo systemctl daemon-reload` 
* `sudo systemctl reset-failed cloudsqlproxy`

After running these, you can then try to start your service again using the `sudo systemctl start cloudsqlproxy` command

## More about `systemd`

This is just scratching the surface on what `systemd` can and does do. A good overview of the types of services and settings available in `systemd` is [here](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/understanding-systemd-units-and-unit-files).


## Resources

https://youtu.be/5JVBpXiYMKo


